Title: Neuro-Symbolic Artificial Intelligence: A Task-Directed Survey in the Black-Box Models Era

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.03177v1

Published Time: Wed, 04 Mar 2026 02:31:35 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
# Neuro-Symbolic Artificial Intelligence: A Task-Directed Survey in the Black-Box Models Era 

## Giovanni Pio Delvecchio 1 , Lorenzo Molfetta 1 , Gianluca Moro 1

## Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Bologna, Cesena Campus Via dell’Universit` a 50, I-47522 Cesena, Italy 

## {g.delvecchio, lorenzo.molfetta, gianluca.moro }@unibo.it 

## Abstract 

The integration of symbolic computing with neu-ral networks has intrigued researchers since the first theorizations of Artificial intelligence (AI). The ability of Neuro-Symbolic (NeSy) methods to infer or exploit behavioral schema has been widely considered as one of the possible proxies for human-level intelligence. However, the lim-ited semantic generalizability and the challenges in declining complex domains with pre-defined patterns and rules hinder their practical imple-mentation in real-world scenarios. The unprece-dented results achieved by connectionist systems since the last AI breakthrough in 2017 have raised questions about the competitiveness of NeSy so-lutions, with particular emphasis on the Natural Language Processing and Computer Vision fields. This survey examines task-specific advancements in the NeSy domain to explore how incorporat-ing symbolic systems can enhance explainabil-ity and reasoning capabilities. Our findings are meant to serve as a resource for researchers ex-ploring explainable NeSy methodologies for real-life tasks and applications. Reproducibility details and in-depth comments on each surveyed research work are made available at https://github.com/ disi-unibo-nlp/task-oriented-neuro-symbolic.git. 

## 1 Introduction 

“Stacked neural layers is all we need ”. This statement sum-marizes most of the current research efforts in the Artificial Intelligence (AI) field, especially in Natural Language Pro-cessing (NLP) and Computer Vision (CV). The advancements and achievements of the latest neural models are marvelous, but they conceal fundamental drawbacks regarding data ef-ficiency and explainability. The need to resort to Neuro-Symbolic (NeSy) components naturally arises from the ne-cessity for trustworthy and efficient solutions. The data type of “thoughts” in the connectionist approaches—also known 

> 1

Equal contribution (co-first authors). 

> *

The definitive, copyrighted, peer-reviewed, and edited version of this Article is published in IJCAI 2025 , pp. 10418-10426, 2025. DOI: https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2025/1157.              

> AAAI 50 (20) IJCAI 31 (11) NeurIPS 28 (17) ICLR 17 (10) ICML 17 (14) EMNLP 9 (6) CVPR 7 (4) ACL 7 (5) ICCV 2 (0) JMLR 2 (2) NAACL 1 (1) TACL 1 (1)
> N
> e
> S
> y
> 92
> B
> l
> a
> c
> k
> -
> B
> o x42
> L
> o
> g
> i
> c20
> S
> h
> o
> r
> t
> 18
> Considered Discarded

Figure 1: Distribution of NeSy peer-reviewed papers over the pe-riod 2017-2024. The innermost ring delineates the inclusion criteria. Greyscale slices denote studies excluded for relying on black-box methods, exclusively logical approaches, or brevity, while the col-ored slice comprises the surveyed ones. The outermost ring repre-sents the number of research works from each selected venue, with exact counts reported in the legend. The number of papers consid-ered for each track is enclosed in parentheses. 

as tensors—and the hidden unsupervised manipulations of such information constitute a physical barrier to hierarchical and abstract planning, whose achievement cannot be reached via mere input-output relationships [Marcus, 2018]. If we envision a not-too-distant future where data availability and quality become critical concerns, mainly due to the poten-tial bias introduced by synthetic information, we urge finding and exploring research pathways with compositional abilities weakly related to the training set’s dimension [Giunchiglia 

et al. , 2022]. We uphold that neuro-symbolic methods can provide an alternative to break the curse-of-dimensionality modern methodologies suffer from. While effective, spar-sity enforcement regularization mechanisms [Bach, 2017] re-quire strong assumptions about the nature of the target dis-tribution, which is unrealistic for the complex domains NLP and CV models usually deal with [Bronstein et al. , 2021]. We argue that symbolic components can be the regulariza-tion for forcing more complex behavior into neural mod-els. By combining data-driven insights with explainable, logic-based representations, we can achieve higher general-ization capabilities [Besold et al. , 2021]. Other data-driven paradigms have also been considered [Lodi et al. , 2010; Domeniconi et al. , 2015]. 

> arXiv:2603.03177v1 [cs.AI] 3 Mar 2026

As the keywords “reasoning” and “explainability” are gain-ing more attention in the community, we highlight a key notational misunderstanding between rule-guided and post-inference forensic strategies. While both methods aim to pro-vide a rationale behind predictions, they fundamentally differ in their approach. Rule-guided methods constrain the out-put to meet specific criteria, while post-inference approaches retrospectively reconstruct plausible interpretable reasoning pathways that led to the results. We further claim that these terms should not be used to advocate human-like faculties but as proxies for generalization behavior within a hierar-chical backbone architecture governed by predefined rules or component-interaction schemas. 

Our Contribution The lack of a clear definition of NeSy in the AI field, the inconsistency in evaluation benchmarks, and the multitude of uncoordinated study directions with no common comparison grounds primarily drive this survey. In this work, we conduct a task-directed literature analysis fo-cusing on how NeSy methods apply and scale in diverse ap-plication contexts. We assess the methodological soundness of such approaches and compare them to black-box systems in real-world scenarios to identify the current limitations of these strategies. Departing from recent surveys that attempt to classify research works along taxonomical axes or net-work architectural variations, we propose a new methodolog-ical approach that disentangles these conceptual and practi-cal inconsistencies by providing a comprehensive and critical overview of NeSy systems. We aim to deepen the understand-ing of these hybrid systems’ advantages and inherent limita-tions, laying the groundwork for future research and bridging the gap between explainability and performance in AI. 

## 2 Taxonomy 

This section discusses the structure and systematic repro-ducible methodologies followed to define our task-directed taxonomy for NeSy methods. We further examine datasets, evaluation benchmarks, and their limitations in delineating fair comparisons across different approaches. As previously discussed, we acknowledge the nuanced usages and incon-sistency in the declination of the term NeSy in NLP and CV literature, where it is often misapplied to methods claiming reasoning and interpretability without structured symbolic frameworks. In this paper, NeSy exclusively refers to ap-proaches integrating neural networks with symbolic compo-nents such as solvers, logical rules, or state-action schemas. 

Inclusion Criteria This survey aims to investigate NeSy systems from the last AI revolution in 2017. To iden-tify relevant research systematically, we used the DBLP SPARQL endpoint to collect research papers published be-tween 2017 and 2024 from general-purpose leading venues in those fields where such technological leap has taken hold more — Natural Language Processing (NLP) and Computer Vision (CV). A customized query was executed to retrieve publications related to NeSy methods using the keywords: “neuro-symbolic”, “nesy”, “rule-based”, “probabilistic-logic”, “probabilistic-reasoning”, “logic-based”, “soft-logic”, “fuzzy-logic”, “concept-learning”, “inductive-logic program-ming”. Figure 1 illustrates the number and distribution of the research works meeting our requirements. We meticulously analyzed the resulting 172 papers and categorized them to identify works that deviated from the designated NeSy for-mulation, excluding non-interpretable methods, purely logi-cal approaches, and short papers. This collection was thor-oughly studied to derive a pool of research works focusing on NeSy approaches that integrate symbolic reasoning with neural networks. We further explored relevant related works to gain a precise picture of the NeSy research landscape. 

Datasets and Benchmarks We analyzed real-world datasets and benchmarks to ensure an unbiased comparison across methods while focusing on practical applications. This study highlighted reproducibility challenges in tasks involving sampling operations, such as negative-example mining. We found substantial inconsistencies on the WN18RR 1 benchmark for different research works using the same black-box model baselines. We further spotlight an evaluation trend in the Nesy literature where synthetic datasets and toy tasks are specifically tailored for the features of the newly proposed method. For this reason, we consider them unsuitable for drawing conclusions and comparisons. In Figure 2, we label most of the identified NeSy tasks with their respective evaluation benchmark if they respect our fairness criteria. Missing values appear in image generation, where different instruction prompts significantly impact results; in Reinforcement Learning (RL), where each method is evaluated on custom tasks or games; and in causal effect estimation, due to outdated benchmarks with limited entries. 

A Task-Oriented Formulation We organize our analysis by identifying three distinct methodological frameworks that traverse the neural-symbolic research landscape: (1) Rule Mining, (2) Rule Enforcement, and (3) Program Synthesis. Within each framework, we categorize techniques based on their theoretical grounding and the tasks they address, focusing on how constraints, symbolic structures, and interpretable programmatic constructs are respectively extracted, integrated, or synthesized. Our taxonomy in Figure 2 is designed to be read in two complementary ways. A top-down perspective highlights how these frameworks interconnect, emphasizing shared logical formalisms and learning paradigms. A bottom-up approach begins with a specific task, moving upward to identify the most relevant methodological families and techniques for that objective. This dual perspective preserves the field’s theoretical coher-ence while promoting a task-directed formulation of NeSy solutions. Enabling bidirectional exploration between related methodologies allows researchers to identify analogous strategies to refine or expand existing approaches based on their objectives. In Figure 3 we show examples of the formal languages employed by each theoretical framework in the taxonomy. In the following sections, we analyze each methodology in depth, illustrating its core principles and highlighting oppor-tunities for advancements in neural-symbolic integration.        

> 1https://github.com/TimDettmers/ConvE FEVER/FEVEROUS e-SNLI
> ADE20K WN18RR
> Horn Clauses
> Natural Logic
> Deterministic Finite Automata
> Rule Mining
> Classification
> Gaming
> MIMIC-IV
> First Order Logic
> Probabilistic Logic
> Rule Enforcement
> +
> Natural Language
> Inference
> Modelling
> Temporal Process Link
> Prediction Extraction
> Relation Image-Text
> Verification
> Generation
> Dialog Claim
> Verification
> Program Synthesis
> Context-Free Grammars
> Semantic Parsing ReferIt3D
> CUB ALGEBRA
> RefCOCO
> +
> +
> +
> Logical
> Reasoning
> Numerical
> Image
> Manipulation
> 3D Question
> Answering
> Causal Effect
> Estimation
> Neural Network
> Verification
> DWIE FOLIO GTSRB Weibo
> MultiWoZ 2.1
> Temporal Commonsense
> Reasoning
> Deterministic Finite Automata
> Learning Shaping
> Reinforcement
> Reinforcement
> Learning Shielding
> McTACO, TIMEDIAL
> Predicated
> Diffusion Reasoning
> Visual Question
> Answering

Figure 2: Task-Directed NeSy Taxonomy. We organize the most relevant task families by classifying each according to applicable NeSy techniques and grouping them into three macro-categories: (1) Rule Mining, (2) Rule Enforcement, and (3) Program Synthesis. We also label the most commonly used datasets to highlight their role in real-world benchmarking and model evaluation. Tasks are organized from bottom to top and from left to right within each category, mirroring the survey’s conceptual progression. 

## 3 Rule-Mining techniques 

Neuro-Symbolic techniques employ rule-mining as a core methodology for model construction, focusing on extract-ing interpretable rules from diverse input data. The com-putational complexity of rule extraction directly correlates with the chosen formal specification language. Horn clause approaches exhibit the highest complexity, requiring matrix representations for ground atom truth values. Natural Logic frameworks show moderate complexity, combining linguis-tic preprocessing with question-answering for entity and op-erator extraction. Deterministic Finite Automata (DFAs) present the lowest complexity, leveraging operational traces with SAT-solving for rule learning. 

3.1 Horn Clauses 

Horn Clauses (HCs), a fundamental component of logic pro-gramming, provide a structured framework for rule-based reasoning. Defined as disjunctions of literals with at most one positive literal as the clause head, HCs enable logical in-ference across various domains. Temporal point process modeling relies on HC-based rea-soning to capture event dependencies, which is particularly crucial in fields such as medicine and autonomous driving, where sudden changes in conditions can have severe conse-quences. [Yang et al. , 2024] introduced a NeSy rule induction method that leverages a sequential covering algorithm and a custom attention mechanism to extract HCs. While demon-strating scalability, trustworthiness, and strong performance over existing models, its ability to capture increasingly com-plex rules remains an open research question. The Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) paradigm auto-mates the discovery of HC-based rules, supporting general-ized reasoning and inference over structured data. In the con-text of extracting rules from structured data like tables and graphs, ILP seeks to identify missing connections between entities by uncovering patterns in existing relationships. DFORL [Gao et al. , 2024], a recent lightweight method for efficient rule extraction, introduces a depth-limited breadth-first search for neighborhood extraction. This proposition-alization technique converts relational facts into vector rep-resentations suitable for neural network-based learning and applies syntactic constraints to reduce the rule search space. By integrating auxiliary matrices and curriculum learning, DFORL uncovers hidden predicates and enhances the effi-ciency and progression of the training process. Although this approach demonstrates potential in real-world applica-tions such as drug design [King et al. , 1995], its performance on the WN18RR link prediction benchmark remains incon-sistent. This variability primarily stems from the dataset’s design, which omits inverse relations in the test set, com-plicating direct comparisons with baseline methods and sug-gesting that methods like DFORL could benefit from incor-porating negation in rule bodies to enhance the model’s abil-ity to handle higher-arity predicates. NCRL, a complemen-tary approach by [Cheng et al. , 2023], focuses on rule com-positionality, sampling alternative paths between connected nodes to construct Horn clauses. This method employs an it-erative algorithm combining an RNN-based selection process with an attention mechanism, aiming to maximize the like-lihood that head predicates can be reconstructed from sam-pled path predicates. By leveraging predicate embeddings, NCRL outperforms [Gao et al. , 2024] on WN18RR, mainly due to its higher ability to infer semantic relationships when inverse relations are missing. Its strong performance in low-data regimes and rapid convergence on GPU makes NCRL a compelling alternative for the same task. Applied to tabular data, Inductive Logic Programming foundations are leveraged in Fold-SE [Wang and Gupta, 2024] to extract interpretable logical rules for supervised tabular classification. Designed to handle both categorical and numerical data with minimal preprocessing, it scales ef-ficiently to large datasets while preserving rule coherence. Following a sequential covering strategy, Fold-SE iteratively refines rules by optimizing a modified Gini Impurity met-ric to enhance classification performance. Built upon Fold-SE, NeSyFOLD [Padalkar et al. , 2024] adopts ILP on ex-tracted high level features for an image classification task. NeSyFOLD derives rules from binary activation masks pro-duced by Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), assign-ing semantic labels to kernels post hoc. Its reliance on CNN architectures —extended and outperformed by modern transformer-based models— constrains its effectiveness, and the exclusion of exception predicates in semantic labeling fur-ther restricts its representational capacity. In the textual domain, Document-level Relation Extrac-tion (DocRE) is a supervised learning task that identifies re-lations r(h, t ) between entities, where r represents the re-lation, h is the head entity, and t is the tail entity. Both NeSy models and black-box approaches have been evalu-ated on DWIE, a widely recognized benchmark for DocRE. JMLR, a novel framework introduced in [Qi et al. , 2024], integrates DocRE with rule extraction through residual con-nections. This approach computes rule support as a weighted sum of atom supports, facilitating the implementation of soft-proof mechanisms that combine relations into HCs. [Jain et al. , 2024] adopted an alternative formulation, treating DocRE as a knowledge base link prediction task and utilizing the black-box model DocRE-CLiP to infer relational structures. FedNSL, introduced in [Xing et al. , 2024], extends NeSy methods to a federated learning setting for DocRE, achiev-ing performance between that of DocRE-CLiP and JMLR. While its evaluation of real-world datasets remains limited to DWIE, the framework demonstrates the potential for privacy-preserving algorithms. By leveraging variational expectation maximization, it efficiently constrains the rule search space, reducing training rounds while maintaining competitive per-formance. A comparative evaluation of these methods —as shown in Table 1— indicates that JMLR significantly out-performs DocRE-CLiP on DWIE while achieving similar re-sults on other benchmarks, highlighting the advantages of rule-based reasoning in capturing complex multi-sentence re-lationships. However, JMLR does not explicitly incorporate external knowledge, a feature more naturally integrated into knowledge-base-driven methods. 

3.2 Natural Logic 

Natural Language Inference (NLI) determines entailment re-lations between a premise and a hypothesis using formal op-erators such as equivalence ( ≡) and forward entailment ( ⊏). [Feng et al. , 2022] proposed a transformer-based NeSy model that integrated GPT-2 with reinforcement learning for op-erator composition and introspective revision using Word-Net. This approach outperforms baselines like BERT on most benchmarks but remains sensitive to linguistic noise, such as adverbs and prepositional phrase modifications in bench-mark datasets. QA-NatVer [Aly et al. , 2023] extended this framework to claim verification, constructing proofs through sentence alignment, operator assignment, and a custom DFA. As shown in Table 1, QA-NatVer highlights the trade-off be-tween NeSy models’ explainability and performance, with a notable accuracy drop due to its reliance on a small training set. Its black-box counterpart, SFAVEL [Bazaga et al. , 2024], overcomes this limitation using self-supervision and distilla-tion to remove the need for labeled data. TabVer [Aly and Vlachos, 2024] further extended NLI to tabular claim ver-ification by incorporating numerical reasoning, recognizing equivalences, alongside pragmatic reasoning through deter-ministic rules. While achieving strong results on FEVER-OUS datasets, it struggles with exact numerical matching, un-derscoring ongoing challenges in adapting NeSy methods to less rigid reasoning tasks. 

3.3 Deterministic Finite Automaton 

Deep Q-learning has proven effective in reinforcement learning (RL), particularly in tasks that require sequen-tial decision-making and structured exploration. Traditional black-box methods struggle with environments like the Atari classic game “Montezuma’s Revenge”, where success de-pends on complex interactions between objects and precise room navigation. A Deterministic Finite Automaton provides a structured way to model sequential dependencies by rep-resenting state transitions through a finite set of rules. This formalism can be leveraged to guide exploration and im-prove decision-making in complex RL environments. Lever-aging this formalism, [Hasanbeig et al. , 2024] proposes a deep Q-learning framework augmented with DFA synthesis to enhance exploration efficiency and policy optimization. By structuring learned behaviors as state transitions, this ap-proach enables more effective reasoning over sequential de-pendencies. Within this framework, the RL algorithm gener-ates exploration traces that capture sequences of state-action pairs alongside reward estimates. These traces inform a DFA synthesis module, which formulates logical constraints and employs a SAT solver to construct a minimal-state DFA en-coding the agent’s learned behavior. By leveraging this struc-tured representation, the deep learning module refines policy transitions, optimizing state-action mappings and iteratively improving decision-making within the RL process. Experi-ments demonstrate that the framework achieves faster conver-gence in tasks requiring sequential planning and object inter-actions, outperforming conventional models that fail to con-verge. Integrating expert-designed DFAs further enhances ef-ficiency by eliminating the initial exploration phase and expe-diting training. Future research may extend this approach be-yond gaming and investigate using more expressive automata, such as Pushdown Automata, to model hierarchical memory structures [Sipser, 1997]. 

## 4 Rule-Enforcement Techniques 

This section presents promising methodologies for enforcing constraints in the form of rules over systems for various appli-cation purposes. These constraints can be enforced through tailored networks or by regularization. 

4.1 First-Order-Logic 

Integrating First-Order Logic (FOL) rules into constrained image generation has been explored to enhance controlla-bility and trustworthiness. [Sueyoshi and Matsubara, 2024] introduced a pioneering approach that extracts FOL con-straints from text using dependency parsing and translates them into equations governing the intensity of attention maps. Rather than mining logical constraints from large datasets, this method employs a regularization strategy —a well-established practice in neuro-symbolic reasoning— as demonstrated by later works in this survey [Cai et al. , 2022; Pryor et al. , 2023]. In this approach, the logical structure is not inferred from data but explicitly imposed through a spe-cialized loss function that guides the generation process. No-tably, this method natively supports logical quantifiers, which All            

> Rectangle (x)FourSided (x)four sides rectangles
> sports
> The kid does not love
> shapes four-sided
> Horn Clauses / First Order Logic
> Probabilistic Logic
> Deterministic Finite Automaton
> Context Free Grammars
> ⟹
> ⟹⟹
> run
> idle
> start
> R1: S→(S)
> Well formed parentheses:
> Non terminal symbols: {S}
> Terminal symbols: {"(",")", λ}
> {λ, (), (()), ..., ( n)n}
> have All ←
> ∀x
> R2: S→ λ
> Semantic Parsing
> ≡≡⊏
> All rectangles have
> are
> Subjects
> things Predicates All
> All

/           

> (λis the empty string)
> Natural Language Inference
> four-sides
> Objects
> does not like
> table tennis
> Rectangle (x)0.9: FourSided (x)←
> rectangles almost sure I'm that have four sides all
> four sides rectangles have Rectangle (x)FourSided (x)←The kid
> rectangles are shapes

Figure 3: Overview of the intermediate formal languages employed by each taxonomy method. 

allow for formulating more precise and interpretable con-straints. Qualitative analyses suggest that incorporating FOL constraints in image generation significantly enhances con-tent fidelity, making this approach highly relevant for applica-tions like chatbots and automated content creation. However, the absence of a counting mechanism prevents constraint en-forcement on repeated entities (e.g., “a black dog and a white dog”), while a bias toward prototypical examples limits flexi-bility. Visual concept learning and semantic parsing could be incorporated to address these challenges [Mao et al. , 2019]. Reasoning over images is essential for detecting multi-modal misinformation, where deception stems from the in-terplay of text and visuals. While traditional black-box ap-proaches have achieved high accuracy in this domain, the lack of interpretability remains a major limitation. [Dong et al. ,2024] introduced a NeSy pipeline that enhances transparency by integrating logical reasoning into the classification pro-cess. Using two encoder models, the model extracts patterns from both modalities and employs a teacher-student network to estimate probabilities for three latent variables: image ma-nipulation, cross-modal inconsistency, and image repurpos-ing. A unique FOL rule classifies a sample as fake if any of the three variables hold true. Table 1 shows this method trail-ing its black-box counterpart by a few points, likely due to the more advanced vision models used by the competitor. Ensuring neural network reliability is a major challenge, especially in fact-checking [Bussotti et al. , 2024], and me-dia forensics, where errors can have serious consequences. Formal verification methods guarantee model behavior un-der specific conditions, ensuring compliance with predefined properties. [Xie et al. , 2022] introduced a structured verifica-tion framework based on the Neuro-Symbolic Assertion Lan-guage (NeSAL), a fragment of FOL designed for expressing and verifying neural network properties. NeSAL formalizes relationships between the inputs and outputs of a neural net-work under verification (NUV) and those of a specification network, which acts as a binary classifier to assess compli-ance with a given property. For instance, in an image classi-fication task, the specification network outputs “true” when-ever the NUV correctly identifies a specific class, such as the digit ”2” in MNIST. This framework enables the formal spec-ification and verification of key properties, such as correct classification of specific classes, stability of high-confidence predictions under certain data distributions, and functional equivalence between different architectures within a defined margin of error. While NeSAL does not provide quantitative measures for violations, its qualitative evaluations of model confidence under distributional shifts demonstrate its poten-tial for debugging and improving neural networks. This ap-proach enhances model reliability by providing a structured verification method, making it valuable in high-risk tasks. 

4.2 Probabilistic Logic 

Probabilistic Logic (PL) integrates probability theory with formal logic to model uncertainty, enabling structured reason-ing in noisy or incomplete data environments. SLEER [Cai 

et al. , 2022] addresses reporting bias in temporal event data expressed in text, where uncommon events are overrepre-sented compared to routine occurrences (e.g., “It took me an hour to get out of bed” versus “It takes me 15 seconds to get out of bed”). This imbalance poses challenges for temporal commonsense reasoning tasks, which rely on multiple-choice question formats derived from textual benchmarks. SLEER aims to improve model robustness in handling temporal in-formation by incorporating structured reasoning principles. A language encoder supports multi-task learning, where clas-sification heads predict specific temporal dimensions, each optimized using cross-entropy loss. The total loss function integrates these individual losses with a regularization term derived from predefined probabilistic soft logic (PSL) rules. Implemented with t-norms, these rules enforce logical con-sistency by connecting the outputs of the classification heads. Unlike traditional PSL models that use weighted rules, this approach relies on carefully crafted constraints for effective-ness. Despite its innovative design, the approach yields only marginal improvements on the McTACO [Zhou et al. , 2019] benchmark 2, underperforming on other multi-task encoders such as [Pereira et al. , 2020]. Expanding on this work, [Cai 

et al. , 2023] introduced LECTER, which integrates a context encoder, a logic induction module for temporal dependencies, and a DeepProbLog-based logic validator incorporating hu-man knowledge. Optimized through regression and logic en-tailment losses, LECTER demonstrated strong zero-shot per-formance on the TIMEDIAL [Qin et al. , 2021] benchmark. As shown in Table 1, LECTER outperforms GPT-3.5 [Brown 

et al. , 2020] in 2-best accuracy, which checks if the top two ranked answers are correct, while GPT-3.5 is benchmarked with standard accuracy. However, its evaluation remains lim-ited to TIMEDIAL, leaving its generalizability unverified. 

> 2

https://leaderboard.allenai.org/mctaco/submissions/public Generating interpretable dialogues presents a significant challenge that can be addressed through reasoning over exter-nal KBs. [Yang et al. , 2022] introduced NS-Dial, a model that integrates external knowledge bases into the dialogue gen-eration process to enhance interpretability. The framework processes input dialogues through an encoder, which extracts relevant features before a hypothesis generator formulates an initial assumption. A hierarchical reasoning engine then iden-tifies supporting triples within the KB, constructing a struc-tured reasoning chain represented as a single weighted HC. This inferred knowledge guides the decoder, which generates the next token based on belief scores derived from the reason-ing process. Although this approach improves interpretabil-ity, black-box methods demonstrate higher performance in di-alogue generation—as shown in Table 1. In the same context, [Pryor et al. , 2023] proposed a NeSy model to identify di-alogue states and transitions in goal-oriented conversations (Dialog Structure Induction), especially in low-resource set-tings. The model combines a Variational Recurrent Neural Network (VRNN) with a symbolic loss based on PSL to en-force structural consistency in sequence prediction. Though effective in domain generalization and adaptation, the ap-proach is surpassed by a simpler VRNN baseline as labeled data increases, revealing potential complexity limitations. PL, like FOL, provides a framework for ensuring network safety. [Yang et al. , 2023] proposed a RL policy that en-forces action safety through structured probabilistic reason-ing. The policy uses annotated disjunctions for action proba-bilities, probabilistic facts for environmental conditions, and logic clauses for safety specifications, enabling queries on shielded policy probabilities and action safety metrics. The approach employs a PL-based strategy, where a shielded pol-icy gradient optimizes rewards while enforcing safety con-straints in situationally aware environments, and a safety gra-dient enhances action reliability in physically constrained set-tings like those affected by inertia. Empirical evaluations in-dicate that the collaboration between these components is es-sential to avoid performance degradation. With RL playing an increasing role in language modeling, we argue that integrat-ing these techniques with instruction tuning may enhance re-sponse accuracy and safety in future real-world applications. 

4.3 Deterministic Finite Automaton 

[Jiang et al. , 2021] introduced a temporal-logic-based re-ward shaping technique to enhance Q-learning in scenarios where the behavior policy deviates from the optimal policy. Their approach incorporates a potential-based reward term derived from a DFA to encode temporal logic constraints, such as “following a human” or “staying in a corridor”. In this framework, the agent iteratively refines a Q-table to esti-mate state-action values, typically updating it at episode end-points. By integrating these rules into the reward function, the method encourages alignment with desired behaviors, ac-celerating convergence to the optimal policy without enforc-ing specific actions. Simulations across various tasks demon-strate that reward shaping is more effective than shielding in exploration-intensive scenarios, while shielding performs better when constraints precisely match task requirements. 

## 5 Program Synthesis Techniques 

Program Synthesis (PS) techniques generate structured pro-grams in either general-purpose programming languages or domain-specific languages (DSLs) to guide system prediction or behavior. This approach shares similarities with method-ologies such as NLI syntax, where words and operations are combined to generate a structured representation for each sample. However, PS introduces significant complexity, as generating a valid program often depends on semantic pars-ing or search algorithms like A*. Its greater expressive power distinguishes it from formal rule-based methods, which are typically constrained by the removal of quantifiers and face challenges in integrating domains such as mathematics. 

5.1 Context-Free Grammars 

PS has been applied to causal effect estimation, where tradi-tional models often rely on strong assumptions that limit their flexibility. [Reddy and Balasubramanian, 2024] introduced NESTER, a model using a DSL defined by a context-free grammar. An A* algorithm with heuristic guidance selects grammar rules iteratively, generating differentiable programs acting as inductive biases. The DSL supports operations such as binary selection, addition, multiplication, and subset com-putation but excludes recursion to maintain simplicity. While evaluations showed competitive results on small benchmarks, scalability to more diverse datasets remains uncertain. 

5.2 Semantic Parsing 

LINC [Olausson et al. , 2023] approaches logical reasoning through semantic parsing, translating natural language inputs into FOL clauses processed by the Prover9 solver. To enhance robustness, the method employs majority voting across mul-tiple generated programs. Comparisons with alternative rea-soning paradigms, including naive prediction, scratchpad rea-soning, and Chain-Of-Thought, show superior performance on synthetic datasets and competitive results on expert bench-marks. A key limitation of this approach is the occurrence of semantic parsing errors, which could be addressed by integrating context-free grammars and consistency-checking mechanisms to improve reliability. Unlike SATLM [Ye et al. ,2023], which encodes problems into SAT formulations and demonstrates strong benchmark performance, LINC relies on FOL-based reasoning, offering a distinct approach to explain-ability compared to SAT’s declarative framework. Beyond textual reasoning, NeSy methods have been ex-plored for visual tasks, with NS-CL [Mao et al. , 2019] serv-ing as a foundational model. By integrating a visual en-coder, semantic parser, and program executor, it achieves near-perfect generalization on CLEVR [Johnson et al. , 2017] and strong performance on real-world datasets like VQS [Gan 

et al. , 2017], requiring only 10% of the training data. [Stam-mer et al. , 2021] extended this approach by incorporating user feedback and explanation loss, improving robustness against confounding factors through symbolic explanations and Slot Attention mechanisms. Building on NS-CL, FALCON [Mei 

et al. , 2022] introduced meta-learning concepts via hyper-boxes, enhancing visual encoders for few-shot learning and biased settings, with competitive results on CLEVR, CUB Method Task Benchmark Evaluation Metric Score Black-Box Competitor ∆ Score                                              

> JMLR [2024] Document Lv. Relation Extraction DWIE [2021] ACCURACY 77 .9% DocRE-CLiP [2024] +10 .8%
> QA-NatVer [2023] Claim Verification FEVER (Dev) [2018] ACCURACY 70 .3% SFAVEL [2024] −20 .0%
> NSLM [2024] Image-Text Verification Weibo [2017] F1-M ACRO 84 .4% SAFE + Hami-m 3d [2024] −3.7%
> SLEER [2022] Temporal Commonsense Reasoning McTACO [2019] F1-M ACRO 69 .0% ALICE [2020] −10 .5%
> LECTER [2023] Temporal Commonsense Reasoning TIMEDIAL [2021] ACCURACY 71 .5% GPT-3.5 [2020] +6 .5% ∗
> NS-Dial [2022] Goal-oriented Dialogue Generation MultiWoZ 2.1 [2020] BLEU 10 .6GALAXY [2022] −9.4
> NS3D [2023] Visual Question-Answering Sr3D [2020] ACCURACY 67 .0% GPS [2024] −10 .5%
> = Rule Mining Task; = Rule Enforcement Task; = Program Synthesis Task.
> ∗LECTER [2023] is evaluated using the 2-best accuracy.

Table 1: NeSy Competitiveness. The ∆ Score field reports NeSy methods’ performance gain over the black-box competitors. 

[Wah et al. , 2011], and GQA [Hudson and Manning, 2019]. NEUROSIM [Singh et al. , 2023] further explored image ma-nipulation by integrating scene graph-based operations and tailored loss functions, though its real-world applicability re-mains unclear. GENOME [Chen et al. , 2024] shifted the focus to modular incremental learning, generating Python-based components for visual reasoning, image manipulation, and knowledge tagging. While outperforming [Singh et al. ,2023] in real-world tasks, its comparison with [Mei et al. ,2022] remains limited. In continual learning, COOL [Mar-conato et al. , 2023] tackled catastrophic forgetting, surpass-ing regularization-based approaches on CLEVR. NS3D [Hsu 

et al. , 2023], adopting the NS-CL formalism in the 3D set-ting, demonstrates strong generalization and zero-shot rea-soning. However, as shown in Table 1, its performance on the ReferIt3D (SR3D) [Achlioptas et al. , 2020] benchmark falls short of the black-box GPS model [Jia et al. , 2024]. 

## 6 Discussion 

Finally, we address open problems, NeSy application chal-lenges, and comparisons with black-box methods. 

Competing with Black-Box Methods NeSy models ex-cel in tasks requiring explicit rule enforcement and struc-tured reasoning, but often struggle in open-domain settings where black-box architectures benefit from large-scale, un-structured data. Table 1 highlights these differences, showing that performance inconsistencies across similar benchmarks make some NeSy solutions highly sensitive to their appli-cation frameworks. The Temporal Commonsense Reasoning task exemplifies how score discrepancies may arise from dif-fering benchmarking strategies. While TIMEDIAL focuses on dialogue masking prediction, McTACO is designed for multiple-choice Question-Answering, resulting in varied per-formance and further highlighting the sensitivity of NeSy solutions to specific application frameworks. Performance drops are particularly evident in tasks such as claim verifi-cation on FEVER [Thorne et al. , 2018] and visual question-answering on Sr3D [Achlioptas et al. , 2020], where black-box models excel in leveraging semantically-reach unlabeled data. A key insight from QA-NatVer [Aly et al. , 2023] is the trade-off between interpretability and data efficiency. Multi-granular chunking and step-by-step scoring improve explain-ability but limit generalization versus black-box methods, creating a balance between symbolic clarity and neural adapt-ability as NeSy models vary in efficiency and expressiveness. 

Future Applications As research in NeSy models evolves, certain areas appear to be approaching saturation. The ex-tensive body of work following NS-CL [Mao et al. , 2019] suggests that image-based reasoning has reached a point of diminishing returns. This evolution demonstrates that well-structured synthetic benchmarks reflecting real-world sce-narios can drive field-wide advances (e.g., CLEVR’s im-pact on spatial reasoning). While reinforcement learning gains traction in robotics and NLP, its high-stakes appli-cations remain limited. Enhancing trustworthiness through structured constraints with NLI—integrating domain knowl-edge via DFAs, shaping rewards to enforce desired behav-iors, and using shielding to prevent unsafe actions—could enable deployment in critical domains like surgery, medi-cal Q&A and gene discovery [Frisoni et al. , 2024; Domeni-coni et al. , 2016], autonomous driving, and legal analysis. In this regard, the robust NLI methods proposed in [Feng 

et al. , 2022] would benefit from the rigorous evaluation on benchmarks featuring complex sentence structures with multi-phrase hypotheses, premises, and conclusions, while systematically analyzing alternation, negation, and indepen-dence operators—particularly valuable for legal text analysis. We argue that the design pattern introduced by NeSyFOLD [Padalkar et al. , 2024], which treats high-level neural fea-tures as semi-structured data for rule mining and partial in-terpretability, warrants further exploration. Investigating its application to models like transformers, autoencoders, and GNNs could enable explainability in black-box models. 

## Acknowledgments 

Research partially supported by: AI-PACT (CUP B47H22004450008, B47H22004460001); National Plan PNC-I.1 DARE (PNC0000002, CUP B53C22006450001); PNRR Extended Partnership FAIR (PE00000013, Spoke 8); 2024 Scientific Research and High Technology Program, project “AI analysis for risk assessment of empty lymph nodes in endometrial cancer surgery”, the Fondazione Cassa di Risparmio in Bologna; Chips JU TRISTAN (G.A. 101095947). LG Solution Srl for partially funding a PhD scholarship to G. P. Delvecchio and L. Molfetta. 

## Contribution Statement 

All authors contributed equally to this work. For more details, visit https://disi-unibo-nlp.github.io. References 

[Achlioptas et al. , 2020] Panos Achlioptas, Ahmed Abdelre-heem, et al. Referit3d: Neural listeners for fine-grained 3d object identification in real-world scenes. In ECCV ,volume 12346. Springer, 2020. [Aly and Vlachos, 2024] Rami Aly and Andreas Vlachos. Tabver: Tabular fact verification with natural logic. TACL ,12, 2024. [Aly et al. , 2023] Rami Aly, Marek Strong, and Andreas Vlachos. Qa-natver: Question answering for natural logic-based fact verification. In EMNLP . ACL, 2023. [Bach, 2017] Francis R. Bach. Breaking the curse of dimen-sionality with convex neural networks. J. Mach. Learn. Res. , 18, 2017. [Bazaga et al. , 2024] Adri´ an Bazaga, Pietro Lio, and Gos Micklem. Unsupervised pretraining for fact verification by language model distillation. In ICLR , 2024. [Besold et al. , 2021] Tarek R. Besold, Artur S. d’Avila Garcez, et al. Neural-symbolic learning and reasoning: A survey and interpretation. In Neu.-Sym. AI: The State of the Art , volume 342. IOS Press, 2021. [Bronstein et al. , 2021] Michael M. Bronstein, Joan Bruna, et al. Geometric deep learning: Grids, groups, graphs, geodesics, and gauges. CoRR , abs/2104.13478, 2021. [Brown et al. , 2020] Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. In Hugo Larochelle et al., editors, NeurIPS , 2020. [Bussotti et al. , 2024] Jean-Flavien Bussotti, Luca Ragazzi, Giacomo Frisoni, Gianluca Moro, and Paolo Papotti. Un-known claims: Generation of fact-checking training exam-ples from unstructured and structured data. In Yaser Al-Onaizan et al., editor, EMNLP , pages 12105–12122. ACL, 2024. [Cai et al. , 2022] Bibo Cai, Xiao Ding, et al. Mitigating re-porting bias in semi-supervised temporal commonsense inference with probabilistic soft logic. In AAAI , 2022. [Cai et al. , 2023] Bibo Cai, Xiao Ding, et al. Self-supervised logic induction for explainable fuzzy temporal common-sense reasoning. In AAAI , 2023. [Chen et al. , 2024] Zhenfang Chen, Rui Sun, et al. GENOME: generative neuro-symbolic visual reason-ing by growing and reusing modules. In ICLR , 2024. [Cheng et al. , 2023] Kewei Cheng, Nesreen K. Ahmed, and Yizhou Sun. Neural compositional rule learning for knowledge graph reasoning. In ICLR , 2023. [Domeniconi et al. , 2015] Giacomo Domeniconi, Gianluca Moro, Andrea Pagliarani, and Roberto Pasolini. Markov chain based method for in-domain and cross-domain sen-timent classification. In Ana L. N. Fred, Jan L. G. Dietz, David Aveiro, Kecheng Liu, and Joaquim Filipe, editors, 

KDIR 2015 , pages 127–137. SciTePress, 2015. [Domeniconi et al. , 2016] Giacomo Domeniconi, Marco Masseroli, Gianluca Moro, and Pietro Pinoli. Cross-organism learning method to discover new gene function-alities. Comput. Methods Programs Biomed. , 126:20–34, 2016. [Dong et al. , 2024] Yiqi Dong, Dongxiao He, et al. Unveil-ing implicit deceptive patterns in multi-modal fake news via neuro-symbolic reasoning. In Michael J. Wooldridge et al., editors, AAAI , 2024. [Eric et al. , 2020] Mihail Eric, Rahul Goel, et al. Multiwoz 2.1: A consolidated multi-domain dialogue dataset with state corrections and state tracking baselines. In Nicoletta Calzolari et al., editors, LREC . European Language Re-sources Association, 2020. [Feng et al. , 2022] Yufei Feng, Xiaoyu Yang, et al. Neuro-symbolic natural logic with introspective revision for nat-ural language inference. TACL , 10, 2022. [Frisoni et al. , 2024] Giacomo Frisoni, Alessio Cocchieri, Alex Presepi, Gianluca Moro, and Zaiqiao Meng. To gen-erate or to retrieve? on the effectiveness of artificial con-texts for medical open-domain question answering. In Lun-Wei Ku et al., editor, ACL , pages 9878–9919. ACL, 2024. [Gan et al. , 2017] Chuang Gan, Yandong Li, et al. VQS: linking segmentations to questions and answers for su-pervised attention in VQA and question-focused semantic segmentation. In ICCV . IEEE Computer Society, 2017. [Gao et al. , 2024] Kun Gao, Katsumi Inoue, et al. A dif-ferentiable first-order rule learner for inductive logic pro-gramming. Artif. Intell. , 331, 2024. [Giunchiglia et al. , 2022] Eleonora Giunchiglia, Mi-haela Catalina Stoian, and Thomas Lukasiewicz. Deep learning with logical constraints. In IJCAI . ijcai.org, 2022. [Hasanbeig et al. , 2024] Hosein Hasanbeig, Natasha Yo-gananda Jeppu, et al. Symbolic task inference in deep re-inforcement learning. J. Artif. Intell. Res. , 80, 2024. [He et al. , 2022] Wanwei He, Yinpei Dai, et al. GALAXY: A generative pre-trained model for task-oriented dialog with semi-supervised learning and explicit policy injection. In 

AAAI , 2022. [Hsu et al. , 2023] Joy Hsu, Jiayuan Mao, and Jiajun Wu. NS3D: neuro-symbolic grounding of 3d objects and rela-tions. In CVPR . IEEE, 2023. [Hudson and Manning, 2019] Drew A. Hudson and Christo-pher D. Manning. GQA: A new dataset for real-world vi-sual reasoning and compositional question answering. In 

CVPR . Computer Vision Foundation / IEEE, 2019. [Jain et al. , 2024] Monika Jain, Raghava Mutharaju, et al. Revisiting document-level relation extraction with context-guided link prediction. In Michael J. Wooldridge et al., editors, AAAI , 2024. [Jia et al. , 2024] Baoxiong Jia, Yixin Chen, et al. Scenev-erse: Scaling 3d vision-language learning for grounded scene understanding. In Ales Leonardis et al., editors, 

ECCV , volume 15067. Springer, 2024. [Jiang et al. , 2021] Yuqian Jiang, Suda Bharadwaj, et al. Temporal-logic-based reward shaping for continuing rein-forcement learning tasks. In AAAI , 2021. [Jin et al. , 2017] Zhiwei Jin, Juan Cao, et al. Multimodal fu-sion with recurrent neural networks for rumor detection on microblogs. In ACM on MM . ACM, 2017. [Johnson et al. , 2017] Justin Johnson, Bharath Hariharan, et al. CLEVR: A diagnostic dataset for compositional lan-guage and elementary visual reasoning. In CVPR . IEEE Computer Society, 2017. [King et al. , 1995] Ross D. King, Michael J. E. Sternberg, and Ashwin Srinivasan. Relating chemical activity to structure: An examination of ILP successes. New Gener. Comput. , 13(3&4), 1995. [Lodi et al. , 2010] Stefano Lodi, Gianluca Moro, and Clau-dio Sartori. Distributed data clustering in multi-dimensional peer-to-peer networks. In Heng Tao Shen and Athman Bouguettaya, editors, (ADC 2010 , volume 104, pages 171–178. Australian Computer Society, 2010. [Mao et al. , 2019] Jiayuan Mao, Chuang Gan, et al. The neuro-symbolic concept learner: Interpreting scenes, words, and sentences from natural supervision. In ICLR ,2019. [Marconato et al. , 2023] Emanuele Marconato, Gianpaolo Bontempo, et al. Neuro-symbolic continual learning: Knowledge, reasoning shortcuts and concept rehearsal. In 

ICML , volume 202. PMLR, 2023. [Marcus, 2018] Gary Marcus. Deep learning: A critical ap-praisal. CoRR , abs/1801.00631, 2018. [Mei et al. , 2022] Lingjie Mei, Jiayuan Mao, et al. FAL-CON: fast visual concept learning by integrating images, linguistic descriptions, and conceptual relations. In ICLR ,2022. [Olausson et al. , 2023] Theo Olausson, Alex Gu, et al. LINC: A neurosymbolic approach for logical reasoning by combining language models with first-order logic provers. In EMNLP . ACL, 2023. [Padalkar et al. , 2024] Parth Padalkar, Huaduo Wang, and Gopal Gupta. Nesyfold: A framework for interpretable image classification. In Michael J. Wooldridge et al., edi-tors, AAAI , 2024. [Pereira et al. , 2020] Lis Pereira, Xiaodong Liu, et al. Adver-sarial training for commonsense inference. In Spandana Gella et al., editors, RepL4NLP@ACL . ACL, 2020. [Pryor et al. , 2023] Connor Pryor, Quan Yuan, et al. Using domain knowledge to guide dialog structure induction via neural probabilistic soft logic. In ACL . ACL, 2023. [Qi et al. , 2024] Kunxun Qi, Jianfeng Du, and Hai Wan. End-to-end learning of logical rules for enhancing document-level relation extraction. In Lun-Wei Ku et al., editors, ACL . ACL, 2024. [Qin et al. , 2021] Lianhui Qin, Aditya Gupta, et al. TIME-DIAL: temporal commonsense reasoning in dialog. In Chengqing Zong et al., editors, IJCNLP . ACL, 2021. [Reddy and Balasubramanian, 2024] Abbavaram Gowtham Reddy and Vineeth N. Balasubramanian. NESTER: an adaptive neurosymbolic method for causal effect estima-tion. In Michael J. Wooldridge et al., editors, AAAI , 2024. [Singh et al. , 2023] Harman Singh, Poorva Garg, et al. Im-age manipulation via multi-hop instructions - A new dataset and weakly-supervised neuro-symbolic approach. In Houda Bouamor et al., editors, EMNLP . ACL, 2023. [Sipser, 1997] Michael Sipser. Introduction to the theory of computation . PWS Publishing Company, 1997. [Stammer et al. , 2021] Wolfgang Stammer, Patrick Schramowski, and Kristian Kersting. Right for the right concept: Revising neuro-symbolic concepts by interacting with their explanations. In CVPR . Computer Vision Foundation / IEEE, 2021. [Sueyoshi and Matsubara, 2024] Kota Sueyoshi and Takashi Matsubara. Predicated diffusion: Predicate logic-based at-tention guidance for text-to-image diffusion models. In 

CVPR . IEEE, 2024. [Thorne et al. , 2018] James Thorne, Andreas Vlachos, et al. FEVER: a large-scale dataset for fact extraction and veri-fication. In NAACL-HLT . ACL, 2018. [Wah et al. , 2011] Catherine Wah, Steve Branson, Peter Welinder, Pietro Perona, and Serge Belongie. The caltech-ucsd birds-200-2011 dataset. 2011. [Wang and Gupta, 2024] Huaduo Wang and Gopal Gupta. FOLD-SE: an efficient rule-based machine learning algo-rithm with scalable explainability. In Martin Gebser and Ilya Sergey, editors, PADL , volume 14512. Springer, 2024. [Wang et al. , 2024] Bing Wang, Shengsheng Wang, et al. Harmfully manipulated images matter in multimodal mis-information detection. In Jianfei Cai et al., editors, ACM Multimedia, 2024 . ACM, 2024. [Xie et al. , 2022] Xuan Xie, Kristian Kersting, and Daniel Neider. Neuro-symbolic verification of deep neural net-works. In IJCAI . ijcai.org, 2022. [Xing et al. , 2024] Pengwei Xing, Songtao Lu, and Han Yu. Federated neuro-symbolic learning. In ICML , 2024. [Yang et al. , 2022] Shiquan Yang, Rui Zhang, et al. An in-terpretable neuro-symbolic reasoning framework for task-oriented dialogue generation. In ACL . ACL, 2022. [Yang et al. , 2023] Wen-Chi Yang, Giuseppe Marra, et al. Safe reinforcement learning via probabilistic logic shields. In IJCAI . ijcai.org, 2023. [Yang et al. , 2024] Yang Yang, Chao Yang, et al. Neuro-symbolic temporal point processes. In ICML , 2024. [Ye et al. , 2023] Xi Ye, Qiaochu Chen, et al. Satlm: Satisfiability-aided language models using declarative prompting. In Alice Oh et al., editors, NeurIPS , 2023. [Zaporojets et al. , 2021] Klim Zaporojets, Johannes Deleu, et al. DWIE: an entity-centric dataset for multi-task document-level information extraction. Inf. Process. Manag. , 58(4), 2021. [Zhou et al. , 2019] Ben Zhou, Daniel Khashabi, et al. ”go-ing on a vacation” takes longer than ”going for a walk”: A study of temporal commonsense understanding. In Ken-taro Inui et al., editors, EMNLP . ACL, 2019.